MS Access migration
=====================

Congratulations on the decision to `migrate` Access to the Web!

After all, it is moving to the modern JavaScript with Bootstrap and jQuery technology! 
Which is powered by Python.

Before considering migrating Access (or any proprietary software), to the Web, please review some 
answers below. Which might help with understanding what to expect.

Top 5 Questions
================

The MS Access might be a `bread and butter` for many developers out there. Particularly in some 
specific industries like the Law practices or similar. And fair enough.

However, the RISK is that in some years to come, the developers will retire. I know, I'm one of them.
Hence, where will the business find people to maintain their expensive application? Maybe they already 
hired the MSSQL database administrator, since the Access developers told them to do so. The DBA's might be around in years to come, but the Access developers? Or better, THE Access itself?

Hence, the faster we move away from proprietary database AND Front End application, the better. Simply because the technology will be around way after the MS Access is gone. This is business after all, let's put aside the emotions. The HTML is here to stay. Who remembers the Netscape any more? Or Mosaic?


1. Complacency
--------------

.. pull-quote::
        `Success breeds complacency. Complacency breeds failure. Only the paranoid survive. Andy Grove`


      The application might be compliant for some business, however does it run on the Web? Apple Mac? Tablet?
      If paranoid about the application safety, how come not paranoid about the application future?
      That is what we are addressing with the migration. The `Future`.

2. VBA?
-------

   `Does your application rely on heaps of VBA for Business Rules (BR)?`

   The VBA cant be migrated to the Web. The question is what is it used for? 5000 lines of VBA code
   might be a dinosaur code! It might be done with Python in 200 lines of code. How about 10 lines?
   
   Take the ML for example! Or better, search how many jobs openings are out there for the VBA! Paying the VBA 
   developer $800/day, does not mean the job for life. It only means the company has a dinosaur technology 
   no one wants to touch internally so they hire a Contractor. 

   The BR might be a way the application authenticate users. Jam.py can reuse the tables used for users, so
   no issues with that. 

3. Excel?
---------

    `Does your application depends on Excel or some other Office products?`

    This might be a show stopper, simply because the organisation will not let go of Excel. This might be 
    particularly true within some Financial institution. The good news is Python can read/write Excel 
    document formats. For sure Access has better interoperability with those products. It is the Desktop
    application after all.
    
    


Depending on file size, the conversion might take a few moments! Please wait to see: File is successfully converted! Access Application with your data from here

After the Access file is uploaded and converted with no errors:

- link to Application Builder will show up, which is using the sqlite3 data converted from Access instantly available on the Web! It is super easy and takes no time!If not interested at all in building the Application, please click on Export to download the DB as zip file which contains the sqlite3 file. The converted sqlite3 database has a long name exactly the same as in provided link. This is to increase safety and security for all downloads.

If interested in showing data on the Web:
The Application Builder link will set the Database to "DB manual mode". This means your new database is safe from changing the structure, like incidentally deleting the table or similar. If you would like to continue migrating Access to Web with the help of Jam.py framework, import all tables into the "Test Import" Group (click on Test Import/Import button), taking care of all needed DB fields correction or missing info. All fields must have a datatype if not already recognized. The "DB field name" should not be touched, the "Caption" is normally MS Access field caption, and the "Name" must be valid JavaScript naming standard, in short, no spaces, special characters, etc. To help out with the process, here are some videos:

Video tutorial - How to publish MS Access Application to Web using Jam.py and SQLite3

Video tutorial - Simple CRM built automatically with Selenium IDE in 2.45minutes, demonstrates the Tutorial. Part 1. First project

New style Demo - Migrated Access Application (expiry on 04 Aug 2022)

After Importing some tables, just replace builder.html with index.html from the link to access your Application. Sometimes the index.html page will not show anything due to Load Balancer issues. Please try after some time. Or start over. One can even set the App password or create users within the Builder. The default App/Builder username/password is admin/111, change it on Project/Users and set Project/Parameters/Safe Mode to restrict access, etc. One can set all lookups to different tables as usual. It should be a fully functional App with all the bells and whistles!

It is important to note that once the Access file is converted and all tables Imported through the builder.html, it is not needed to use this service at all. Immediately use the Export [CTRL+E] option and download the Export file. Than, install the Python Jam.py framework locally or on the server, create the New application, Import the same downloaded file, and point the Application to sqlite database as per creating the New application. That is all.

Notes/Issues:

This tool is for the database tables only, it does not convert MS Access file with no tables in it. Hence, no need to upload a Front end application, which probably connects to SQL Server or some other database(s). Output will be empty, or it will contain only a few tables.

The process is expecting that the Primary Key exist on all tables. Please address and fix this issue before attempting the conversion. Only Use One Numeric Field as the Primary Key, ie. AutoNumber field.

MS Access might have a special character, space, slash/backslash, dash (-),quote('), etc for the table field, as well as table name. The conversion will try to replace those, however, we would advise to fix the issues in MS Access, before attempting the conversion.

The conversion will fail if there are linked tables in MS Access. Please remove any linked tables before attempting the conversion.

The conversion will fail if Access is using utf-16-li, no need to try again. No log or link will be produced and we suggest fixing Access.

There might be an #Error in the Access field, please fix it if conversion fails, and attempt again. The best is to inspect the Log file, sometimes clearly showing the error. If the log file is empty, something went wrong. No need to try again if Access wasn't fixed.

Please do not upload confidential, private or password protected/encrypted database. If conversion to SQLite3 is needed for such data, the tool can be provided on demand. Password protected database conversion might fail, no need to try again.
